[Doc] Document authentication integration patterns (#2986)
thunder-id/thunderid: docs/content/guides/key-concepts/authentication/auth-integrations.mdx

---
title: Auth Integrations
sidebar_position: 1

> description: Understand how ThunderID authenticates users and the three integration models available for your application.

Author: fixed

      { "ref": "input_password", "identifier": "password", "type": "PASSWORD_INPUT", "required": true }
    ],
    "actions": [
      { "ref": "action_submit", "nextNode": "node_bs12" }
    ]
  }
}
```

Your application renders the username and password fields, collects input, and submits them back using the `executionId` and `challengeToken`. <ProductName /> validates the credentials and returns either the next step or the final assertion token. See [Assertion Tokens](#assertion-tokens).

## Direct API

Direct API authentication exposes individual, single-purpose authentication endpoints. Each endpoint performs exactly one operation — verify credentials, send a one-time password (OTP), verify an OTP, or initiate a social login. The application calls these endpoints directly and controls the entire authentication sequence.

The core design principle is **composable operations**: authentication is a set of building blocks the application assembles in any order, according to its own logic. No server-side journey or policy enforcement applies. No flow configuration or application registration is required.

> **When to use:** Use direct API authentication for headless or scripted scenarios — CLI tools, automation scripts, or server-to-server authentication — where you need direct control over individual authentication operations without flow configuration or application registration.

Author: fixed

---

> title: Auth Integrations

Reviewer: Prefer if we can use a different title/ headings since we already have something called integrations.

Reviewer: Can't we simply use "Authentication"?

Author: Updated the side bar structure as follows:
```
key-concpets
   |
   |- Authentication
                  |
                  |-Passkeys
                  |-Integration Models          <--- this doc
```

sidebar_position: 1

> description: Understand how <ProductName /> authenticates users and the three integration models available for your application.

Author: it is to consistently with other places

> description: Understand how <ProductName /> authenticates users and the three integration models available for your application.

Author: fixed

---
import { B2CSolutionPatternsRoadmap } from '../../../../src/components/B2CIdentityJourney';

# Auth Integrations

> Authentication verifies identity — confirming that a user, service, or device is who it claims to be. <ProductName /> provides three integration models for adding authentication to an application, each grounded in different standards and built on different assumptions about trust, UI ownership, and control.

Reviewer: Better to avoid `—` in docs. @himeshsiriwardana WDYT?

Author: removed `-` usage and rephrased the wording.

 <B2CSolutionPatternsRoadmap />

## Redirect-Based

<ProductName /> implements the OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework ([RFC 6749](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749)) and OpenID Connect Core 1.0 delegation model. The application delegates authentication to <ProductName /> as the authorization server — the user redirects to <ProductName />-hosted sign-in pages, authenticates there, and returns with an authorization code that the application exchanges for tokens.

The core principle is **delegation**: user credentials never cross the application boundary. The application receives only cryptographically signed tokens ([RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519)) as proof of authentication.

> Supported grant types:

Reviewer: This shouldn't come here. It should go to a separate section where we describe oauth concepts.
@thiva-k hope you're tracking that improvement. Let's remove these details

Reviewer 2: Yes, this will be included in the oauth concepts section. We can link to that from here if needed

Author: removed grant types related info as it will be included in the oath docs

**When to use:** Use redirect-based authentication when your application can redirect to a hosted sign-in page. Choose this approach when you want <ProductName /> to own the full authentication experience (sign-in, sign-up, recovery), need full OAuth 2.0 token issuance, or require credential isolation.

### Key Features

- **Standards-compliant** — OAuth 2.0 and OIDC; works with any compliant client library.
- **Credential isolation** — Your application never sees user passwords or authentication secrets.
- **Full authentication journey** — Sign-in, sign-up, recovery, Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA), and consent are handled by <ProductName />.
- **Customizable hosted pages** — Brand the sign-in experience via the Flow Designer.

### How It Works

1. User clicks **Sign in**; your application redirects to <ProductName />'s authorization endpoint.
2. User completes the configured flow on <ProductName />-hosted pages (sign-in, sign-up, recovery, or consent).
3. <ProductName /> redirects back to your registered redirect URI with an authorization code.
4. Your application exchanges the code for an access token, ID token, and optionally a refresh token.

```

> ┌──────────────┐                          ┌──────────────┐

Reviewer: Prefer if we can use diagrams instead. @himeshsiriwardana WDYT?

Author: added diagrams

<img width="889" height="837" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cfe32211-75f1-498e-8c89-1ef3935f4313" />

│  Application │                          │  ThunderID   │
└──────┬───────┘                          └──────┬───────┘
       │                                         │
       │  GET /oauth2/authorize                  │
       │  ?response_type=code&client_id=...      │
       │────────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                         │
       │  [User authenticates on ThunderID-      │
       │   hosted sign-in page]                  │
       │                                         │
       │  Redirect: ?code=...&state=...          │
       │◄────────────────────────────────────────│
       │                                         │
       │  POST /oauth2/token                     │
       │  (authorization code)                   │
       │────────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                         │
       │  Access token, ID token, refresh token  │
       │◄────────────────────────────────────────│
```

> ### Available Endpoints

Reviewer: Shall we keep this doc simple by extracting out these additional OAuth details like endpoints, different grant types, etc out?
Let's have another concept doc space for OAuth stuff and move them there

Author: removed endpoints subsections as these will be added in OAuth docs

└──────┬───────┘                          └──────┬───────┘
       │                                         │
       │  POST /oauth2/token                     │
       │  (refresh_token grant)                  │
       │────────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                         │
       │  New access token (+ new refresh token) │
       │◄────────────────────────────────────────│
```

For public clients (no client secret):

```bash
curl -kL -X POST https://localhost:8090/oauth2/token \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
  -d 'grant_type=refresh_token' \
  -d 'refresh_token=<refresh_token>' \
  -d 'client_id=<client_id>'
```

For confidential clients, authenticate with HTTP Basic Auth:

```bash
curl -kL -X POST https://localhost:8090/oauth2/token \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' \
  -u '<client_id>:<client_secret>' \
  -d 'grant_type=refresh_token' \
  -d 'refresh_token=<refresh_token>'
```

Response:

```json
{
  "access_token": "eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIs...",
  "token_type": "Bearer",
  "expires_in": 3600,
  "refresh_token": "a_new_refresh_token..."
}
```

</details>

## App-Native

> App-native authentication separates **UI rendering** from **authentication flow execution**: the application owns every screen, while <ProductName /> drives the journey server-side — sequencing steps, applying policies, and branching on context. Authentication logic and MFA decisions live in the flow definition on <ProductName />, so changes take effect immediately without modifying or redeploying the application. On successful completion, <ProductName /> returns an assertion token — a signed JWT representing the completed authentication. To obtain OAuth 2.0 access tokens, exchange the assertion token at the token endpoint using the Token Exchange grant ([RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)).

Reviewer: "App-native authentication separates **UI rendering** from **authentication flow execution**"
This statement is not correct right?

Author: updated the wording to convey the idea that while the flow orchestration is handled by ThunderID, the UI rendering will be handled but he app.

Two integration modes are available, both controlled via the `verbose` field in the Flow Execution API. Both modes are typically consumed through a <ProductName /> SDK that manages API calls, state, and response parsing.

**When to use:** Use app-native authentication when your application renders its own authentication screens and must stay embedded — no redirects to hosted pages — while <ProductName /> enforces authentication logic, MFA, and policies server-side.

### Key Features

- **Server-side flow execution** — Authentication logic, step ordering, and branching live in <ProductName />. Changes take effect immediately without redeploying your application.
- **Full UI control** — Your application decides how each step looks. No iframe or hosted-page constraints.
- **Policy enforcement** — MFA, conditional steps, and adaptive prompts apply automatically based on the flow definition.

> - **SDK support** — <ProductName /> provides JavaScript and framework-specific SDKs that handle API calls, state management, and response parsing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SDK support** — <ProductName /> provides different SDKs that handle API calls, state management, and response parsing.
```

Author: updated with the suggested change.

└──────┬───────┘                    └──────┬───────┘
       │  POST /flow/execute (start)       │
       │──────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                   │
       │  Step 1: Collect username/password │
       │◄──────────────────────────────────│
       │                                   │
       │  POST /flow/execute (credentials) │
       │──────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                   │
       │  Step 2: Collect OTP              │
       │◄──────────────────────────────────│
       │                                   │
       │  POST /flow/execute (OTP)         │
       │──────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                   │
       │  Flow complete: assertion token   │
       │◄──────────────────────────────────│
```

### Available Endpoint

| Endpoint | API Endpoint | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| Flow Execution | `POST /flow/execute` | Starts and advances the authentication flow, returning the next step or the final authentication result |

See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/flow-execution) for full endpoint specifications.

### Integration Modes

#### Step-by-Step

> In step-by-step mode (`verbose: true`), the application advances the authentication journey one step at a time. After receiving a response, the application calls the Flow Execution API for the next step, renders the described screen, collects user input, and submits the response back. Each response includes `inputs`, `actions`, and a `meta` component tree.

Reviewer: This is applicable for all native integrations despite the mode right? I think better to highlight the difference in step-by-step mode.

Author: The mode naming is used from https://thunderid.dev/docs/next/use-cases/b2c/solution-patterns. But I think it is better to rename the two modes. step-by-step and managed can be bit confusing and may not clearly give the idea what differs in two modes. 

suggested renames:
- step-by-step --> declarative
- managed --> data-only

Author: renamed as follows:

- step-by-step --> verbose mode
- managed --> non verbose mode

:::note
The SDK is recommended — it renders the component tree automatically. Without it, your application must parse and render the component tree itself.
:::

Request:

```bash
curl https://localhost:8090/flow/execute \
  --request POST \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "applicationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
  "flowType": "AUTHENTICATION",
  "verbose": true
}'
```

Response:

```json
{
  "executionId": "2c6d4c45-3de9-4a70-ae6b-ba1d034af6bc",
  "flowStatus": "INCOMPLETE",

>   "stepId": "3071b6c6-0119-465c-b00b-3a0e6f88a730",

Reviewer: stepId is not yet returned right?

Author: removed from sample responses

      {
        "ref": "input_phone",
        "identifier": "phone",
        "type": "TEL_INPUT",
        "required": true
      }
    ],
    "actions": [
      {
        "ref": "action_submit",
        "nextNode": "node_bs12"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### Example

A username and password flow: your application starts the flow, <ProductName /> responds with the first step describing what to collect, and your application renders the form.

Request:

```bash
curl https://localhost:8090/flow/execute \
  --request POST \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{
  "applicationId": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
  "flowType": "AUTHENTICATION"
}'
```

Response:

```json
{
  "executionId": "2c6d4c45-3de9-4a70-ae6b-ba1d034af6bc",
  "flowStatus": "INCOMPLETE",
  "challengeToken": "a3f2e1b0c9d8e7f6a5b4c3d2e1f0a9b8...",
  "type": "VIEW",
  "data": {
    "inputs": [
      { "ref": "input_username", "identifier": "username", "type": "TEXT_INPUT", "required": true },
      { "ref": "input_password", "identifier": "password", "type": "PASSWORD_INPUT", "required": true }
    ],
    "actions": [
      { "ref": "action_submit", "nextNode": "node_bs12" }
    ]
  }
}
```

> Your application renders the username and password fields, collects input, and submits them back using the `executionId` and `challengeToken`. <ProductName /> validates the credentials and returns either the next step or the final assertion token. See [Assertion Tokens](#assertion-tokens).

Reviewer: Shall we include the next step too? I.e. submit username/ password and obtain assertion similar to the above

Author: added.

## Direct API

Direct API authentication exposes individual, single-purpose authentication endpoints. Each endpoint performs exactly one operation — verify credentials, send a one-time password (OTP), verify an OTP, or initiate a social login. The application calls these endpoints directly and controls the entire authentication sequence.

The core design principle is **composable operations**: authentication is a set of building blocks the application assembles in any order, according to its own logic. No server-side journey or policy enforcement applies. No flow configuration or application registration is required.

> **When to use:** Use direct API authentication for headless or scripted scenarios — CLI tools, automation scripts, or server-to-server authentication. It gives you direct control over individual authentication operations without flow configuration or application registration.

Reviewer: Also this is only suited for simplest integration scenarios. If they have a advanced/ complex login requirement, this pattern is not recommended

Author: updated the context  including suggested info.

### Key Features

- **Composable operations** — Call individual authentication endpoints in any order. No flow execution layer required.

> - **No configuration required** — No application registration or flow setup. Call the endpoints directly.

Reviewer: Client is fully responsible for the orchestration and getting the authentication journey implemented correct

Author: updated the context including suggested info.

- **Step-up authentication** — Chain methods by passing assertion tokens between calls to build a stronger authentication context progressively.

> - **Assertion tokens** — Each successful call returns a signed JWT ([RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519)) recording completed methods, user identity, and assurance level.

Reviewer: Also the same assertion can be enriched by sending it during the next auth request

Author: Updated the context:
`Each successful call returns a signed JWT ([RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519)) recording completed methods, user identity, and assurance level. You can enrich an existing assertion by including it in the next authentication request.`

### How It Works

1. Your application calls an authentication endpoint directly with user credentials or input.
2. <ProductName /> validates the input and returns user details and a signed assertion token.
3. To chain methods, include the assertion token from the previous call in the next request.

> 4. Exchange the final assertion token for OAuth 2.0 access tokens via the Token Exchange grant ([RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)) if needed.

Reviewer: Not sure this exchange is possible. 
@thiva-k is this something possible with atomic API tokens in the current implementation?

Reviewer 2: Exchanging our auth assertion to OAuth tokens is possible. Not sure if we should mention it explicitly for atomic APIs, since there is no way to get `authorized_permissions` right? (unlike assertions obtained from flow APIs)

Author: removed the step from direct api section

```
┌──────────────┐                       ┌──────────────┐
│  Application │                       │  ThunderID   │
└──────┬───────┘                       └──────┬───────┘
       │                                      │
       │  POST /auth/credentials/authenticate │
       │─────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                      │
       │  User details + assertion token      │
       │◄─────────────────────────────────────│
       │                                      │
       │  POST /auth/otp/sms/send             │
       │─────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                      │
       │  Session token                       │
       │◄─────────────────────────────────────│
       │                                      │
       │  POST /auth/otp/sms/verify           │
       │  (with previous assertion token)     │
       │─────────────────────────────────────►│
       │                                      │
       │  Enriched assertion token            │
       │◄─────────────────────────────────────│
```

> ### Available Endpoints

Reviewer: IMO this is not required for concept docs and should go into related feature docs

Author: removed from concept docs

| Finish social login | `POST /auth/oauth/{provider}/finish` | Completes the OAuth flow using the authorization code returned by the identity provider. See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/google). |
| Start standard OAuth login | `POST /auth/oauth/standard/start` | Initiates the OAuth flow with a standard identity provider and returns a redirect URL. See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/standard). |
| Finish standard OAuth login | `POST /auth/oauth/standard/finish` | Completes the OAuth flow using the authorization code returned by the standard identity provider. See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/standard). |
| Start passkey authentication | `POST /auth/passkey/start` | Initiates WebAuthn/Passkey authentication for a user and returns a challenge. See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/passkeys). |
| Finish passkey authentication | `POST /auth/passkey/finish` | Completes WebAuthn/Passkey authentication using the credential assertion. See the [API Reference](/docs/next/apis/#tag/passkeys). |

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: Not required for concept docs IMO

Author: removed the prerequisites as these are more suitable for implementation guide docs

### Example

A credentials authentication: your application submits the username and password, and <ProductName /> returns the user details and a signed assertion token.

Request:

```bash
curl -X POST https://localhost:8090/auth/credentials/authenticate \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "identifiers": { "username": "thor" },
    "credentials": { "password": "<password>" }
  }'
```

Response:

```json
{
  "id": "550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
  "type": "superhuman",
  "ouId": "660e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000",
  "assertion": "eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIs..."
}
```

See [Assertion Tokens](#assertion-tokens).

### Step-Up Authentication

Direct API authentication supports step-up authentication. Pass an existing assertion token to any supported endpoint to enrich the assertion token with the new authentication method. This builds a stronger authentication context progressively.

The following endpoints support step-up authentication:

- `POST /auth/credentials/authenticate`
- `POST /auth/otp/sms/verify`
- `POST /auth/oauth/google/finish`
- `POST /auth/oauth/github/finish`
- `POST /auth/oauth/standard/finish`

**Example: Password + SMS OTP**

```bash

> # Step 1: Authenticate with credentials

Reviewer: Shall we split 3 steps into proper sections? Formatting doesn't look good when we have all in the same code block

Author: updated the example to have 3 steps as separate request/response

  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "identifiers": { "username": "thor" },
    "credentials": { "password": "<password>" }
  }'

# Step 2: Send OTP
curl -X POST https://localhost:8090/auth/otp/sms/send \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "sender_id": "<sender_id>",
    "recipient": "+1234567890"
  }'

# Step 3: Verify OTP with the assertion from Step 1
curl -X POST https://localhost:8090/auth/otp/sms/verify \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "session_token": "<session_token_from_step_2>",
    "otp": "123456",
    "assertion": "<assertion_token_from_step_1>"
  }'
```

The final response contains an enriched assertion token that reflects both authentication methods.

## Assertion Tokens

Both App-Native and Direct API return an assertion token on successful authentication — a signed JWT ([RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519)) containing:

- **Authentication methods used** — Which mechanisms completed (credentials, OTP, social login).
- **Assurance level** — The strength of the authentication based on the methods used.
- **User identity** — Information about the authenticated user.

> To obtain OAuth 2.0 access tokens, exchange the assertion token at the token endpoint using the Token Exchange grant ([RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)). To skip assertion token generation, set `skip_assertion: true` in the request body:

Reviewer: Skip assertion is only applicable for Atomic/ Direct APIs. Having it here gives the impression this is applicable for flow assertions as well

Author: updated to include this info for direct API only

```bash
curl -X POST https://localhost:8090/auth/credentials/authenticate \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "identifiers": { "username": "thor" },
    "credentials": { "password": "<password>" },
    "skip_assertion": true
  }'
```

## Design Comparison

| | Redirect-Based | App-Native | Direct API |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Trust model** | Delegated — <ProductName /> is the authority | Shared — <ProductName /> controls the flow execution sequence, app renders | Application-owned — app controls the sequence |
| **Credential exposure** | <ProductName /> only | Passes through the application | Passes through the application |
| **Authentication logic** | Server-enforced by flow | Server-enforced by flow | Application-enforced |
| **Token output** | OAuth 2.0 access tokens, ID tokens | Assertion token (JWT); exchange via Token Exchange ([RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)) for OAuth 2.0 tokens | Assertion token (JWT); exchange via Token Exchange ([RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693)) for OAuth 2.0 tokens |
| **Flow configuration** | Required | Required | Not required |

> | **Standards basis** | [RFC 6749](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749), OIDC Core 1.0 | Flow Execution API + [RFC 6749](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6749) | [RFC 7519](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519), [RFC 8693](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8693) |

Reviewer: Shall we remove this last row? We only have entry for redirect based which is obvious here

Author: removed
